[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It started for
me, jeez, years ago.
I was about 15 years old.
And I started getting exposed.
I had a friend in my life who
was really influential who
handed me a book.
It was called "The Grape Cure."
And the book was about people
who harvested grapes in Europe
for pressing wine and
how during that time
they would fast on just the
grapes for a couple of weeks.
And it was about how
they had prevented
a lot of the chronic
degenerative diseases
that we see today in our
culture, particularly cancers.
And so I was
exposed to this idea
that food could be
like a medicine for us.
And we could use food to cleanse
our bodies, to rejuvenate
our bodies, and that if we did
that periodically it's possible
we could have longer,
healthier lives.
And so that was
my first exposure.
And that kind of began a quest
that's now lasted 17 years.
And the conclusions
I'm arriving at today
really do stem from
that initial experience.
I grew up in the United
States in the 1980s, primarily
my childhood, born
in the late '70s.
So I was really part of that
whole industrial food complex.
And I was exposed mostly to
white flour, to corn, to soy.
I grew up on processed foods.
And most of the
foods I ate really
came in shapes and
colors that were
more about marketing than it
was about the original food.
So I wasn't really exposed
to a lot of whole foods.
We had certain things.
We had that standard
baked potato.
We had the steaks occasionally.
But mostly I grew up
with boxed cereals.
I grew up with pasteurized
industrial dairy products.
I grew up with meats
that came on Styrofoam
and wrapped in plastic and
very little understanding
of where my foods came from.
And I got to say, actually,
from my childhood,
I was hyperinflamed.
I had a lot of respiratory
issues that came up for me.
I thought I had asthma.
And I didn't
understand that I was
in a chronic state of
inflammation from the foods
that I was eating.
Of course, my mother,
doing the best she could
and thinking she's doing a good
thing when she's bringing home,
say, the pseudo-wheat
bread or the butter
split wheat bread--
that's really,
like we talked about before,
the dyed, brown-looking bread.
I was exposed to all
those kind of foods.
I had a lot of
problems from that.
I remember as a kid, we'd
go to the supermarket,
this big, glitzy, glamorous
mall of processed foods.
And I would open
the refrigerator.
And I'd stick my
head inside of it
in the cooler where they
keep the frozen foods.
The air was so crisp.
I could breathe there.
And I remember
that I had trouble
breathing my whole life.
That went away once
I changed my diet.
But yeah, I grew up in a giant
international food experiment.
And I was right at ground
zero in the United States
at that time.
Well, I've done
a lot of research
over the last few years
about the indigenous people
of the planet.
When I say that, I
know a lot of us--
we think indigenous people.
We think about primitive
peoples from the past.
We forget that in Australia,
it's 200 years ago.
In parts of the United
States 200 years ago,
there were people
living here indigenously
the way they had lived for
thousands of generations.
And they did not have the
chronic degenerative diseases
we have today.
So these are very new
things we're dealing with.
And they had found
ways to live in harmony
with their ecosystems and with
their bodies in such a way
that they didn't break down
the way we're breaking down.
And if we look at
how they live, we
find a very interesting thing
with regard to food and birth.
And what we find is that
most native peoples,
indigenous people have some
kind of feeding protocol
that the mother undertakes
sometimes for a couple of years
before she gives birth.
And also, usually the father
has very specific food regimen
that he's on as well.
And this is to ensure that they
bring forth a healthy baby.
Because if you imagine
primitive peoples
before there was the medical
interventions of today,
it's very important that they
bring forth a healthy child.
And they're going to be
living with that child,
raising that child in their
tribe in a very personal way.
So it's important
that they carry forth
really healthy genetics.
I think that the
effect of the food--
I mean, it's pretty obvious.
If you demineralize the human
being, if you remove and strip
the fats from a human
being-- or maybe, say,
the mother's never even
had certain fats, like DHA,
which her brain is made up of.
She's never had enough of that.
And she's chronically
deprived of that nutrient.
When she brings forth
a baby, that baby
is going to require
that nutrient as well.
Say DHA, the brain fat
I'm talking about--
that needs to be passed
to the child, who's
going to form his brain
or her brain out of it,
as well as myelinate their
entire nervous system with it.
Well, if there's
not enough of that,
it's going to draw on the
mother's reserve, which
is in her brain, which is
going to mean the baby's going
to be somewhat malformed.
And the mother's also now going
to be stripped of it as well.
And what we see is that
after the birth process,
the mother is now in a deep
state of nutrient deficiency.
And the child is
also undernourished.
So there's a failure to
thrive in both of them.
And we have names for this.
We call it "postpartum," for
instance, the type of brain
depression that comes on.
Often it's because of
a lack of nutrition.
Well, I think that we
have a culture today that
considers it normal to bring
forth children in a very
what we like to
think of as a sterile
environment in hospitals.
My birth took place
in a hospital,
which means my first
impression of the world I live
in was fluorescent lights, was
men and women wearing masks,
were knives and scalpels and
scissors, were antibiotics.
And what wasn't there
for me was fresh air.
And there wasn't any
clean running water.
And there wasn't any sunlight.
And there wasn't any soil.
And the only microorganisms
that were really
inhabiting that place were
very dangerous organisms,
like staphylococcus,
that were looking
to infect my mother and my
body because we were in this--
what we love to
think of as sterile
is actually one of the more
toxic environments that exist.
So our first experience
in this world
is often in a very sterile,
very artificial environment.
And from that
moment forth, we're
sort of encouraged to live
in artificial environments.
I think this has a profound
effect on our health.
But it also has
a profound effect
on where we start looking
when we sense something
going wrong in our body.
So if you were brought forth--
if you were bonded
to doctors and nurses
before you were bonded
to your mother, remember,
there's a critical
moment at birth
where a bonding experience
is meant to happen.
And there's enough of
the hormone oxytocin
flowing through the
child and the mother.
There's this moment that's
meant for their bond to happen.
But if you're taken
from her, particularly
in the kind of birth where--
say, a cesarean section--
where they erect maybe a sheet
between the woman's lower body
and upper body so the baby and
the mother cannot even make eye
contact, your first bonding
experience is, of course,
doctors and nurses
in a hospital.
Then periodically,
every few weeks, you're
brought back to the
hospital for your checkups,
where you're separated
from your mother.
And you grow to trust the
doctors and the nurses in a way
that you don't even
trust your own family.
And so their advice becomes
more and more paramount to you
over the years.
And when you start
to encounter problems
in your body, who are
you going to go to?
Well, of course you're
going to go to the doctors.
And you're going to
go to the nurses.
take their advice.
And little did we know,
they received no nutritional
training.
Little did we know that they
aren't trained in health.
But they're trained in disease.
And they're trained
in naming diseases,
in choosing pharmaceuticals to
treat disease symptoms with,
but never really treating
underlying causes.
We don't know that.
And we continue
to go back to them
time and time again
the way we were
trained to right from birth.
Are human beings a
domesticated species?
I mean, when we look at
other domesticated species--
for instance, the dog, the
cat, the pig, the chicken--
these are all animals that
have a progenitor species.
In other words, there
is a form of that animal
that lives in the
wild environment that
can feed itself, that can
build its own home, that
can survive in nature.
And then there's the
domesticated version, which
we draw out of its genome.
And we sort of breed ourselves.
"Domesticated" means
"of the household."
So we have animals like our
dog, say maybe a little lap dog.
A very cute lap dog
is not an animal
that can survive out in its
natural environment anymore.
In fact, purebred dogs--
one in four of them
have degenerative diseases,
genetic diseases because
of the way they've been bred.
Well, human beings are in
a very unique situation
because we are probably
the oldest domestic animal.
The dog is thought to
have been domesticated
about 15,000 years ago.
And right around
that time is where
we started to domesticate
ourselves as well.
And what I mean is we
go from this organism
that lives in environments, just
like the hunter-gatherer people
all over the world did and
still do in some places.
And we become city builders
and agriculturalists.
And we start breeding ourselves.
Now, in the same way
that the pig is bred out
of the wild boar,
well, the modern human
is bred out of the
indigenous person.
And so if you think
of the wild boar,
this is a much more robust
organism, much more muscular,
much more ferocious
of an animal,
whereas the pig is
much more portly, much
more-- it has a greater
tendency to put on body fat,
has a tendency toward
diseases that are not
found in its wild progenitor.
We're the same way.
We are a domesticated species.
We've been living indoors
for quite some time.
In the last few decades, we've
seen such a serious increase
of industrialization that
our future generation
or the children
of today are not--
they epigenetically do
not resemble the people
of a few generations ago.
They're much more prone
to degenerative disease.
They're much more
prone to cancer.
prone to heart disease.
We're seeing now cancer
and heart disease
are the top killers.
I think this generation coming
up, it's 50% will have cancer.
Why is that?
Well, it's partly
how we're living.
And it's partly how
we're breeding ourselves.
We are the fundamental
domesticated species.
We're of the household.
Well, one of the interesting
things about indigenous people
is that we don't see a lot
of the chronic degenerative
diseases that we're seeing
in modern people, what
we call "modern people."
I think it's an unfair term
because in a lot of ways
we're very backward
in how we live.
But we don't see the
cancer prevalence.
We don't see the heart disease.
We don't see the arthritic
conditions, not to the degree
that we see today.
These are considered
diseases of civilized people.
It has a lot to do
with what we eat.
with how we breed.
But one of the really
interesting things about
hunter-gatherer people or people
who do a very moderate amount
of agriculture--
we could call them
"hunter-gatherer-gardeners."
What we see in those
people is that they
have an extremely high
amount of nutrition,
an extremely low amount
of calories in their food
compared to people in
modern civilization, which
have a very high
amount of calories
and a very low amount of
nutrition available to them.
So what happens for
an average person
today in our civilization
is they're not
getting enough, say,
vitamin A. They're
not getting enough vitamin D.
They're not even getting enough
vitamin C. They're chronically
starved of nutrients.
So they keep eating
and eating and eating.
But the foods that
they keep eating
don't have enough
of these nutrients
for them ever to get the
stock that they need.
But what those foods do
have is a lot of calories.
So what happens is
they start to pack
these calories onto their
body in the form of body fat.
And the body starts to
accumulate or bioaccumulate
too much not just fat, but also
all the associated pollutants
that are in that food supply.
The opposite and inverse is true
when we look at native peoples
because what we see is that
the foods they're choosing
are typically lower in calories.
But they have 10 times
the fat-soluble vitamins.
Those are vitamins
A, D, E, K. And they
have four times the
water soluble vitamins.
That's the B vitamins
and the C vitamins.
They have so much more
nutrition than what
we have today, which is our
RDA, our Recommended Daily
Allowance, how much
nutrient we're allowed.
We're allowed far less than
our predecessors were getting.
But we also get
far more calories.
And this is leading to
all kinds of problems.
And what we're
seeing today is when
you get too many
carbohydrates in your diet,
especially those refined
empty carbohydrates,
we see things like diabetes.
We see blood sugar
and balance issues.
And we see a lot of weight gain.
And so this is a really
prevalent problem today
because people are overfed.
But they're also
starving to death.
Well, Weston A. Price is are
really fascinating dentist
in the early 1900s.
And he was just one of
those pioneering thinkers
who dared to ask the question,
why are we getting cavities?
Now, our teeth are
modified bones.
And so if we have a cavity,
we have a bone disease,
a sort of bone disease.
We like to overlook all of
the dental issues going on
in our culture.
We don't want to see that these
are degenerative diseases.
And our culture seems more
interested in filling teeth
than it does in figuring out
why we have dental problems.
Well, Weston Price decided
to go around the world
and do an anthropological
study of the teeth of people
in many different tribes
and different civilizations
around the world.
What he found was that
not only cavities,
but also the
crowding of the teeth
and the loss of space
in the dental arch
doesn't really happen until
a culture switches over
to our modern industrialized
types of foods.
We were just talking about
these refined carbohydrates.
And that seems to be one
of the primary culprits.
I think a really helpful way
to think about white flour--
white flour is essentially
the refined-out carbohydrate
from a plant like wheat.
It's very similar to
what white sugar is.
White sugar is the purified
sucrose extracted out of, say,
beets or sugar cane.
It's a pharmaceutical sugar.
Well, white flower's a
pharmaceutical carbohydrate
in the same way that cocaine is
extracted out of a coca plant.
So you have the native
cocaine in the matrix
of the plant itself.
Or you have the
pharmaceutical version.
To me, white sugar,
cocaine, white flour--
they all fall in
the same category
of a whitened, extracted,
purified substance that's
drawn out of the plant kingdom.
All of them create
imbalances in the body
and lead to a host of problems.
We know the problems
caused by something
like cocaine, purified cocaine.
We know that causes problems.
We're comfortable with
referring to that as a drug.
We're becoming culturally
more comfortable
with recognizing
white sugar as a drug.
I think people are
starting to understand
how addictive a substance it
is and how pharmaceutically
extracted it is.
We're beginning now-- it's
starting to filter in.
People are getting it that
this white bread culture
that we've grown up on--
but what it is is
pharmaceutical food.
It's not real food.
The problem is that when you
eat just the carbohydrate
without the associated
vitamins, without the associated
minerals, without the
associated fats, which
are critical for the
absorption, without the fibers,
you are essentially
poisoning yourself
with too many calories
and not enough nutrition.
And it's going to
lead to problems.
And we can see those
problems all around us today.
Right now you would have to make
it a full-time job of a team
just to keep up on the new
ones being created and put
into the environment every day.
So it's a challenging
question to answer.
But for me, I think
the ones that I'm
most hypersensitive to and
most aware of in my environment
right now are probably the
plastics, the petrochemicals.
For a long time
you could imagine
that most of the substances
people interacted with
were fairly obviously
derived from nature.
So even a few hundred years
ago in a highly advanced
civilization like the
European civilization,
you would still be
able to look at a thing
and tell what it came from.
In other words, you'd
be able to say, OK,
these floors are marble.
And this pouch is
made of leather.
And I can trace back
how that was made.
Today we interact with
so many plastics, so many
petrochemicals that it's
very difficult to even know
where a thing has come from.
Now, unfortunately, a lot
of these petrochemicals
are biologically active when
they get into our bodies.
And they're biologically
active often in a mimicry
of other endocrine system
hormones, particularly
the estrogens.
And we're seeing a lot
of reproductive issues
arise out of this.
I want you to
remember that when you
come into contact with
a piece of plastic,
that plastic is oil soluble.
In other words,
when you touch it,
it's able to pass through
very often through your skin
because your skin
has oils on it.
This is particularly true
of the soft plastics,
like the cellophanes
and the packaging
that we encounter all the time.
These soft plastics
have softeners in them.
And those softeners get
into our tissue very easily.
We absorb them through the skin.
They get into our blood.
The body thinks
these are estrogens.
And they're causing
a lot of problems
in men, particularly
low sperm counts,
and women, a host of
reproductive issues.
I think that we're
pushing ourselves
towards a sterilization
kind of an event.
We're seeing epidemic
reproductive and fertility
problems arising on a plastics.
We all need to
become aware of that.
We need to become aware
of the pollutants that
are in the water supply today.
Those are things like
chlorine, fluoride,
and more and more
pharmaceutical drugs
that we're interacting with.
These things are toxins.
We call them "drugs."
We call them "medicines."
We also know that
they're poisonous.
That's why there's
a host of warnings
that come associated with them.
People have forgotten
but once knew
that medicines, poison,
toxin were all synonyms.
You could use them synonymously.
So we're encountering a lot
of poisons in our environment
today via pharmaceuticals.
So I'm very aware
of those things.
I think we need to be
aware of the metals that
accumulate in our bones.
We need to be very thoughtful
about what heavy metals
we come into contact
with, particularly
mercury, which is still being
put into people's mouths.
It's interesting
that if you were
to put even one filling worth
of mercury into a 5-acre lake,
the EPA could shut
that lake down.
But you can put that into
a human being's mouth.
And we can believe the
mythos that it's not
going to bioaccumulate
into the bones.
We know it does.
And we know that
it's neurotoxic.
We know that fluoride
is neurotoxic.
Really what I see is
we're in this world
today where probably
your best bet
is to see how much you
can replace in your life
with natural substances.
Can you get rid of the
nylon comforter on your bed
and replace it with
cotton and down?
Can you get rid of
the Gore-Tex jacket
and replace it with wool?
Can you get rid of
the plastic couch
and replace it with leather?
Can you bring in hemp?
Can you bring in natural fibers?
And can you begin to
get rid of these things?
Because one day it
will be looked back on.
And we'll see that it's
a crime against humanity
to take a BPA-laden
plastic bottle,
fill it with pharmaceutically
active tap water,
put in genetically modified
soy, microwave that, and give it
to a baby.
We'll see that that's a
crime against a newborn,
that you are causing the
bioaccumulation in that child's
tissues.
And these things
biologically are active.
And they're going to affect the
child for the rest of its life.
We need to be very thoughtful
about what we come into contact
with that you can identify
as a natural substance
from your ecosystem.
One of the biggest ways that the
food industry is manipulating
our relationship to food is--
and when we say,
the food industry,
it's important we
understand that includes
the FDA because they
really work hand in hand.
Some of the larger
corporations, particularly
corporations like Monsanto, are
manipulating our food supply
in a way that very few
people are aware of.
And that's the way that
they're genetically modifying
organisms.
Well, what that means is they're
splicing genomic material
from one species
into another species.
When we say
"species," by the way,
"species" means these
are like individuals
that can breed together.
So even though we're
very much like chimps,
a human being is a distinct
species from a chimp.
We can't breed with a chimp.
We're a different species.
So there are these
ancient, ancient boundaries
around a species that
keep it from being
able to transport genetic
material from itself
into another organism.
We're protected from that.
Now, what's been figured
out-- and I got to say,
it's not as an exact
a science as they
would like us to believe.
But they're able to use a gene
gun to bombard genetic material
into a species from
another species
to get traits to come through.
The way that was
discovered, by the way,
was the Roundup
Ready toxin that's
being sprayed all over
our food supply today
is so toxic that it
inhibits enzymes in plants.
And it basically causes
plants not to be able to grow.
Well, they eventually found
a bacteria behind the plant
where that stuff was being
produced that was surviving
in the runoff.
And they were able
to take the gene
from that that caused it to
be able to survive the Roundup
Ready and started
putting that in plants.
That opened up a host of genetic
manipulation opportunities.
And we're at a place
now where people
don't realize how
much of their food
has been modified genetically.
We don't know the
results of feeding people
that because studies
are being suppressed.
We're not seeing any studies.
And don't you think that
before introducing genetically
modified food to
a human population
we would do some studies
to test if this is safe?
But we're not doing
those studies.
And those studies-- the
few that have been done,
they're often stopped because
we see that they're dangerous.
Or the results are very,
very muddled or hidden.
But for the most part,
there's no studies being done.
The genetic modification
of our food supply
is probably the strangest
thing we're probably--
it's like science fiction.
If people understood
that, they probably
wouldn't want to
eat these foods.
Unfortunately,
every time somebody
gets a bottle of canola
oil, vegetable oil,
they're most likely ingesting
genetically modified food.
Every time you go to the mall
and you buy a cotton outfit,
you're buying genetically
modified cotton.
Every time you eat any
food containing soy--
and by the way, that's
most any processed food--
you're consuming
genetically modified soy.
So much of our food supply,
the corn, particularly corn--
every time you eat a processed
food, you're getting some corn.
You're getting some soy.
You're getting some cotton.
And we're wearing it.
We're wearing genetically
modified species.
We're eating genetically
It's a total experiment.
We don't know the results.
We have seen some studies
that show gene transfer
from the organisms that
have been genetically
modified into the bacteria
that reside in us.
So we know there has
been some horizontal gene
transfer into our probiotic
organisms that inhabit us.
We know that this genetically
modified material gets into us.
The results of it we don't know.
And they've manipulated
the media enough
that the story we get is
everything's status quo.
Everything's OK.
And unfortunately,
we really don't know.
And I think I, for one, will
choose to eat a diet free
of those things.
Even if I were to find
out they were safe,
I don't really want my
relationship to the Earth,
to the planet, to the
plants and animals that
live here to be one where
my species is modifying
their genetics.
I don't think it's OK.
I think it's immoral.
So personally, I choose
to eat a diet that's
really free of those GMOs.
But unfortunately, most of
the people I know and love
are bioaccumulating these
toxic genetic materials
in their body.
And time will tell what the
results of that will be.
Yeah.
Well, OK, so we all have
these extreme cravings.
They cause us to want to eat
all kinds of crazy things,
particularly when we've
been raised around them.
One is because the
emotional connection
we have through marketing and
brand association and brand
recognition.
You see these
stories all the time
of kids' first words
being a brand name now.
We are so branded as a culture.
By the way, that term for me is
so funny because "brand" to me
means the way that you
mark cattle with fire
and approve that
you own that cattle.
So it's pretty
funny to me when I
see somebody brand loyal
with their Nike imprint
across their chest
like branded cattle.
And we become associated
to brands of foods,
which is funny because--
say we went to the cereal aisle.
I remember as a kid
begging my mother.
I want this kind of cereal.
I want that kind of cereal.
And if you look at
the ingredients,
they're all the same cereal.
It has to do with the
shapes and the colors.
And when we're children and we
get associated to these cartoon
character foods, we become
emotionally connected to them.
As we get older, we
become very addicted
to things, particularly some
of the neurotransmitters,
like MSG, which is
in a lot of our food,
a lot of the stimulants
that are in our food.
Why is it easier
for somebody to go
get a soda instead of a juice?
Well, they kind of
know that they're not
going to get the kick
out of the juice.
They're addicted to
the caffeine in it.
We all come from cultures
that use stimulant plants.
That's in our history.
Anywhere there is a
caffeine-like molecule
in nature, the native people
there took advantage of that
and used that.
But they didn't do it in this
refined way that we do it now.
And the thing is people
are addicted to it.
And they require it
for their metabolism.
They know they're going
to get a headache.
They know they're
going to crash.
They're not going to get
through the workday if they just
go make that switch.
And so it's one of those
things that a lot of us
have to do gradually.
We have to wean ourselves off
of the neurotransmitters that
are added to the food.
We have to wean ourselves
off of the stimulants that
are in the food.
And we have to develop new
associations to healthy foods.
The average person walking
through the food court
is not interested in the salad
at McDonald's because the salad
at McDonald's is
not really salad.
It's been grown-- It's
monocropped in deficient soils.
It's got no nutrition in it.
Another thing is that
all through our history,
we've really had to find--
as a species.
I'm talking 200,000 years.
As a species, the big
challenge is to find calories.
And so our bodies are
biologically adapted to this.
We seek calorie sources.
When I say that, particularly
what I'm talking about
are fats and sugars.
If we taste something
fatty or something sweet,
we get an immediate
signal saying, yes, I
want more of this.
Because for our
hunter-gatherer ancestors--
and that goes right up to
a few hundred years ago--
anywhere they could
find fat or sugar meant
survival for those people.
It meant carrying
forth their genetics.
Today we have so
many calorie sources.
But we still have
the same signal.
So somebody bites
into a burger or they
take a sip off a milkshake.
And they get those
fats and those sugars.
And their body says,
yes, more, because it's
used to behaving in an
environment where there's feast
and there's famine.
The problem is we got feast
like nobody's business.
We just don't have any famine.
And so people keep eating,
keep eating, keep eating.
And the idea of going to a
low-calorie food, like a salad,
like a juice, for the average
person doesn't make sense yet.
Now, I know you've
experienced it.
When you start
drinking the juice,
you start eating the
salad, especially
if they're high
quality, you start
to get feelings in your body.
They feel so good.
You develop new associations
of pleasure to those foods.
But there's that
weaning process.
So the average
person isn't going
to make that jump without
a little education,
a little coaxing, and probably
without some good role modeling
from somebody who's doing
it, who they look up to,
who they respect and they see
getting the results they really
want.
All human beings are driven
by pain and pleasure.
And we all want pleasure.
And we all want results.
Unfortunately, most people have
been programmed in such a way
that they associate
pleasure with things
that actually cause pain.
Well, the best
way to lose weight
and to keep the weight
off is to move towards--
sequentially and at
a sustainable pace--
towards a diet that
at least approximates
the diet that we are
biologically adapted to.
So if we look
around the world, we
see human beings have been able
to inhabit the whole globe.
And they've been able to do it
on a host of different foods.
From the extreme arctic,
where people eat almost
exclusively animal fat and
muscle and organ meats,
to the jungle, where
people had access
to far more fruits and
far more plant material,
we see people thriving and
people staying lean and healthy
and avoiding
degenerative disease
and not putting on extra weight
almost no matter what they eat.
Now we are eating a diet that
no longer resembles that.
So it's kind of like
if we lived in a zoo.
If you put a human
being in a zoo the way
you put a chimpanzee in a zoo,
well, the question would be,
what do we feed that
human in the zoo?
Well, we don't feed chimpanzees
in zoos Captain Crunch cereal,
Twinkies, and donuts.
We feed them a diet that
looks like the diet they
eat in their ecosystem.
We sort of live in a
zoo-like environment now.
We live in this
artificial environment.
And unfortunately, we're
not feeding ourselves
the foods we're
biologically adapted
to, the foods of the
hunter-gatherers,
the simple foods, the plant
foods, the fruits, the nuts,
the seeds, the vegetables, the
animal foods of high quality.
We're not feeding ourselves
these things anymore.
So we're eating
all refined foods.
Of course we're
putting on weight.
If somebody really wants to
lose weight and take it off,
here's what I recommend.
Start looking at the foods in
your house and asking yourself,
could I replace this food with
a well-grown, local option
that's not as processed?
For instance, if you're
used to making pancakes out
of white flour, can you go to
a farm locally that produces
flour and stone grinds it?
Can you find that?
If you look in your fridge,
and you've got milk in there,
and you know it's
processed milk,
and it's got the
growth hormone in it,
and you know it's
pesticide laden,
and you know there's pus in
it, can you find a farm locally
that can produce
that food for you
the way people used to get it?
If you've got the
bananas in your house
from the supermarket,
can you replace them
with an organic option?
Can you move in a
direction that brings you
towards the reapproximation
of your natural diet?
Can you do that?
The convenience is getting
all your stuff in one place.
And for me, my life looks
like I've got a few outlets.
I got a few farms that I go to.
And I see different people
to get my food needs.
But those foods keep me lean,
keep me trim, keep me healthy,
keep me vibrant,
keep me glowing,
keep me wanting more
because the feeling
I get from these highly
nutritive foods that look just
like the foods I grew up with--
I mean, I grew up
with all of the foods
that I'm eating today.
I just eat the real
version of them today.
The foods I eat today are
not genetically modified.
The food that I eat today
have not been processed.
The foods that I
eat today have not
had all their goodness
removed and have
been grown in real soil.
If you can get those foods
and a little bit of movement
into your life, it's not
hard to keep weight off.
Now, a lot of us-- we
have some healing to do.
We have recovery to do because
the world we grew up in
has been such a barrage
against our nervous system,
our endocrine system.
Our health has
been under attack.
So sometimes there's going
to be a period of healing.
Probably the best thing a
person can do in the beginning
is clean themselves out and get
on a detoxification program.
That looks like eating
a lot of salads,
drinking a lot of juices,
eating a lot of fruits.
And that's fun.
That's fun for a while.
And when the weight
starts coming off,
people become so excited.
They don't want to stop
and then eventually start
to add more and more foods back
in from healthy sources that
look like the foods
they used to eat
but are actually more
satisfying and more nutritive.
And they'll find that they can
live a life of not just being
fit and trim, but actually
feeling how they've always
wanted to feel in a
body that works properly
and that stays healthy forever.
Yeah.
The reason people put the
weight back on after diet
is because most
of these diets are
not sustainable ways of eating.
You simply can't
do them forever.
And if you can, you're
one of those rare, driven,
type-A individuals
that will force--
you will mold reality
to whatever you desire.
And those are rare people.
And I don't want
to be that person.
So for me, growing up,
I was an overweight kid.
And I was always
trying to figure out
how to lose the weight.
And I was seeing--
I would try these
different approaches.
And none of them were
really structured
in a way you could eat forever.
So I think what happens is
that we set ourselves up
for failure because,
yes, you can manipulate
the ratios of calories.
You can manipulate
the ratio of fat
to protein to
carbohydrate infinitely.
We keep seeing all
these variations.
So I remember the high
carbohydrate, low fat.
And then it switched
to, well, let's go
high protein, low carbohydrate.
And then it switched to high
fat, moderate carbohydrate.
It just keeps switching around.
And all of these
things have an effect
because what you're doing
is restricting calories
from people.
Or you're manipulating the
way their metabolism works.
Eventually they're
going to fall back
into a rhythm of living
for life because it's not
comfortable to make your
whole life about food.
So eventually it's going to come
back if you haven't actually
changed what you're doing.
One of the things
people don't understand
is all these diets are
just rearrangements
of the same foods.
People are talking
about the same foods
from the supermarket.
So if you eat from this
aisle and not this aisle--
and it's constantly rearranging
a host of suite of foods
that we know are not
beneficial to people.
Very rarely do you
see-- what we're
talking about today
is not a diet,
not in the sense
of a weight loss.
They used to call
these "reducing diets."
If you look in any of
the old literature,
say, from the 1950s, you'll see
this term a "reducing diet."
The definition of
a diet is the foods
that an organism habitually
eats to sustain itself.
So what we're talking
about is a real diet
in the sense of
what a species eats.
When we get onto
our real diet, we
don't have to think about
these things anymore.
But if we're going to eat
from that suite of foods that
exists in the
supermarket, we're going
to constantly have problems.
We're going to constantly
have to monitor ourselves
because these
foods make you fat.
These foods make you sick.
These foods break down your
pancreas and give you diabetes.
These foods cause cancer.
So we're going to have to
constantly play with them
to try to moderate that in a
very scientific way, in a very
uncomfortable way, in a way
that's counterintuitive to us.
When we step outside of
that supermarket setting,
we start going to
the farmers' markets.
We start going to the farms.
We maybe even step outside and
forage some of our own foods.
When we start to
get foods like that,
we don't have to think
about this anymore.
We let our bodies guide us.
We don't have to
worry we're going
to put the weight back on
because your body does not
want to be overweight.
This is one of the biggest
tricks the marketeers have
used against us.
They convince us that our body
is trying to get fat on us.
And we have to somehow
whip it into shape,
stop it, fight it all the
time because if we let it go,
it's going to get fat.
That's not reality.
Your body is designed
to be healthy.
Health is the natural state.
And if we let our
body do what it
wants to do in an
environment where
all the foods are
healthy choices--
all of them-- we don't have to
be concerned with these things
anymore.
And we can live without
fear of weight gain.
And we can live without fear
of degenerative disease.
We require exercise.
Of course, exercise feels good.
Extreme exercise is not healthy.
We know that marathon
running is not healthy.
It damages the
joints of the body.
It's not a healthy thing to do.
I know people that run
100-mile races, good friends.
They know that's not healthy.
They're driven to that goal.
But it's not good for the body.
I mean, it's cliche now.
But we grew up with
no pain, no gain.
We grew up with this
idea that, again, you
have to punish your body
into submission in order
to get it under control
because we so fear
the wildness of this world.
We think of our body-- we sense
that our bodies are animalia.
They're animal.
We're animals.
And we're afraid of the
wildness of that thing.
And then if we let it go
unchecked and out of control,
it's going to lead us
into total barbarousness.
We're going to be fat oafs
sitting around all day,
eating gluttonously.
Nothing could be
further from the truth,
just like all the
other organisms that
inhabit the planet
who all maintain
their health effortlessly
just by going out
on their daily business of
being a squirrel or being a fox
or being a bird.
And we think that the
only way we can be healthy
is to abuse ourselves.
And so we do abusive
diet programs.
And we do abusive
exercise programs.
And if we're real good, we
combine abusive exercise
and abusive diets together.
It's madness.
Walking every day is exercise.
It's plenty of exercise.
Moving your body around a
little bit-- plenty of exercise.
You don't have to do something
extreme unless you're
trying to get in shape
on extremely refined
carbohydrates and
extremely refined fats
and toxic, rancid fats
and denatured proteins.
And you're eating these
foods all the time
that by their very
nature are going
to lead some portion of
the population to obesity.
Some people have metabolisms
that can handle it better
than others.
But many people will be
led to obesity that way.
And then the only way
they're going to able
to stay on those foods
and lose the weight is
to either get a gastric bypass
or do some extreme workout
program that will
not be sustainable
and unfortunately won't supply
the nutrients that they need
to recover from the workouts.
So the marathon
runner on spaghetti--
eventually the cartilage in
his knees is going to go.
And if he's not
getting those proteins,
those cartilaginous
proteins in his diet,
his knees are going
to break down.
He's not going to be able
to keep doing the exercise.
Then the weights going
to come on because he's
eating the carbohydrates.
It's just a cycle.
So again, it's the same story.
The same story is come
back to the Earth.
Come back to nature.
Come back to ecosystems
and real food
and real exercise, which is
going about your day today.
That's always been
enough exercise.
So I sometimes see--
I've got a great image at
home of some Aboriginals
from Australia.
And they have bodies unlike
any man I've ever met.
The abdominal development,
the pec development--
it's incredible.
They look like fitness models
or lightweight bodybuilders.
Their exercise is
going about their day.
They don't get up in the morning
and do a push-up routine.
They don't get up
and do an ab routine.
They don't need to.
You go about your day.
Our bodies are designed
for the day-to-day living.
The problems arise when
we take ourselves out
of our natural
environment and we
subject ourselves to
unnatural habitat,
which is what we've done.
Foods that detoxify the body--
some are really obvious,
and some are not.
Some of the more obvious
ones are green vegetables,
chlorophyll-rich foods.
In hospitals,
chlorophyll is used
or was used as an internal
deodorant for people
who had a lot of body odor.
Chlorophyll is a great way
to clean our bodies out.
So those are, of course, all
of our well-grown, heirloom,
organic vegetables.
These are fantastic for
cleaning our bodies out.
There's some less
obvious stuff as well,
though, like gelatinous
plant foods--
for instance, things like
chia seeds or aloe vera
or the seaweeds,
these foods that
have a gel that they
secrete when they get wet.
What those do-- those gels move
through our intestinal tract.
If we eat something
like aloe vera,
this slimy, slippery
food, if we can blend that
into a drink some way
or something like that
and get it into our bodies,
these gelatinous fibers
moved through our
intestinal tract,
absorbing things, binding
them, and passing them through.
Particularly what
they do is they
absorb the bile salts that
are released by the liver,
bind those up,
and pass those out
and with it all the
fat-soluble toxins the liver's
trying to get rid of.
If we don't have these
gelatinous fibers,
we tend to reabsorb
a lot of that.
So the liver tries to get rid of
something, puts it in the bile,
dumps it into the small
intestine hoping that it
eventually gets out of us.
But it gets reabsorbed.
So one of the reasons that that
gelatinous fibers-- like chia
seed is another great example.
You put that in your body.
And that can really do a
lot to clean out the liver.
You combine that with
the juices or salads
of fresh, young,
green vegetables,
you've got a really
great program
for cleaning the body out.
Fruits can be very
good, though I'd
recommend going with
fruits with seeds instead
of sterile foods, foods that
have been hybridized until they
lose their ability to reproduce.
I think it's important that
we look at things like berries
that still contain their seeds.
When we bring those
foods into our bodies,
we get cleansed very easily.
I think removing animal
foods from our diet
and increasing plant food is a
great way to cleanse ourselves.
And then the inverse
is true when we want
to build our bodies back up.
And so we get control
over these two horses.
There's a great analogy.
If you've got two horses, and
one's lame and the other one's
going full speed, you're really
just going to go in a circle.
You need two healthy horses
to go in a straight line,
similarly with our foods.
If we steer it that way,
we build our bodies up
with animal foods.
We detoxify our body
with plant foods.
And when we're in a good
state of homeostasis,
we can steer both of
those horses accurately.
We can move in a straight line.
But cleansing our bodies
is not complicated.
It's not difficult.
It's just going
to require high-quality,
green plant food.
It's going to require
gelatinous fibers.
It's going to
require good water.
It's going to mean
needing good air.
getting sunlight.
And our body wants
to cleanse itself.
It's looking to cleanse itself.
It knows how to cleanse itself.
You don't even have to
really do very much.
Just input gentle
foods, be out in nature,
and your body will cleanse
itself very easily.
Yeah.
People can eat themselves
sexier, for sure.
And really, I think
if you look at--
there's great studies.
I love these studies that show--
they'll do a computer
model of what a man thinks
a woman's attracted to and
what a woman is actually
attracted to.
And typically men think a guy
25 pounds heavier, particularly
in the chest and biceps, is
what a woman's looking for.
And really, what do
people find sexy?
They find confidence sexy.
They find health sexy.
And both of those
things can really
come about from what we eat.
We are naturally designed to
screen each other for health
for reproductive purposes.
We look at each other.
And we see glowing skin.
We see shining eyes.
And that's sexy to us.
A confident person
is sexy to us.
Yeah, you can accomplish that
through food pretty easily.
Again, we're constantly
barraged with the idea
that technology is
the way to sexy,
whether that's
medical intervention
or whether that's
pharmaceutically based
or whether that's some
kind of longevity cream
we're going to put
on our face that
comes from some pharmaceutical
company somewhere.
But really, these
things come from nature.
Caring for our skin
is pretty simple.
It needs oil.
It needs good, food-grade oils.
Why?
Because your skin has something
on it called an "acid mantle."
And that's really where the
bacteria that inhabit our skin
live and keep us healthy.
When we wash with alkaline
soaps, for instance,
when we do the TV commercial
scrub down and lather up
and we put the suds
all over us, we
strip those oils off our body.
We strip that acid
mantle off our body.
And we become really
susceptible to skin infections.
This leads to things like acne.
This leads to things
like fungal infections.
Really what our skin's requiring
is oils, the same kind of oils
you'd eat, like coconut
oil, like olive oil.
These are the things you see
in really high-end skin creams.
You actually see
food-based oils.
We put those on
our skin, our skin
can be colonated again
by the bacteria that
live in our acid mantle.
And we actually become
very immune to things that
would normally attack our skin.
We see this all
through the world.
We see it in ancient
Rome and Greece,
where they used the olive oil.
We see this in Polynesia,
where they cover their bodies
with coconut oil.
The skin can be fed just
like the digestive tract.
It can be fed.
It lives on oils.
And so it's not hard to
take care of ourselves.
It's not hard to be sexy.
You just got to learn
how to be healthy.
And the real trick to
learning how to be healthy
is to stop listening to all
of the white noise coming
from the media about
our health and looking
at how our ancestors lived.
And it wasn't that long ago.
And it's not that hard to do.
Well, cultured foods
have been around as long
as people have been
around harvesting food.
And the reason is we
didn't have refrigeration.
And things-- they go bad
after a few days, or "go bad."
Really it means they
begin to ferment
and break down because other
organisms start breaking them
down.
Well, human beings over time
learned how to control that
and learned how to actually
create very beneficial colonies
of organisms in the food.
Now, when I'm talking
about cultured food,
I'm talking about yogurt.
I'm talking about kimchi.
I'm talking about sauerkraut.
I'm talking about wines and
beers made in the old way.
These are foods that have been
colonated by other organisms
and transformed by
those organisms.
Those foods were condiments
all through our history
as a civilization.
We used those foods
to help us digest
and to replenish
the bacteria that
colonizes our intestinal tract.
People know this.
But there are a lot more
other organisms in your body
than there are cells.
And so we know we're
about 4 to 10 times
more bacteria
primarily in our gut
than we are human cells
in our whole body.
I like to tell people,
you are an organism.
You are cells famed by bacteria.
It's bacteria that
take care of you.
They colonate you
and protect you
from disbiotic organisms, the
ones that cause a disease.
And they live all in
your digestive tract.
Unfortunately, with the
amount of chlorine people
are exposed to in their
drinking water, in their shower,
with the amount of
antibiotics people take,
these things kill off the
microbes that live in them
and strip them of their
primary immune system.
Those are the bacteria that
are there to protect you.
How do you get that back?
Well, you get it back
through fermented food,
properly fermented food.
The process is simple.
You take some cabbage.
You shred it up.
You put it in water with
salt. And you press it down
under the water.
And two weeks later,
you have sauerkraut.
And it's been done
all over the world.
And we call those
"cultured foods. "
Now, we also say that
if you go traveling,
you become more cultured.
Why do we say that?
Well, one of the
interesting things
is when you go to
another culture,
you actually get the bacteria
of those people into your body.
Every person has a unique
bacterial profile in their gut.
And the more places you've gone,
the more cultures you have,
the greater that
fingerprint becomes.
You're more cultured not
just with art and literature.
You're literally more cultured
in your digestive tract,
more immune to things
than you were before.
The way we can
build that immunity
is by eating cultured foods.
And what we see is, what's
really a culture all about?
Because culture does mean
to us art and literature.
But culture also means where a
bacteria or yeast is growing.
And I think really there is this
association between a culture
and what foods it cultures.
And those were really
one time more synonymous
and more connected.
So we see if we go to Japan,
we see miso is their culture.
If we go to Northern
Europe, we see
sauerkraut is their culture.
If we go to, say, Russia, we
see kombucha as their culture.
And they all have these
different cultured foods
that speak for who their
culture is and speaks
for what cultures
live inside them.
And accessing these
foods today means
we can get some of these
cultures back in our body.
Yeah.
Well, OK, I really
do believe everything
we need is all around us.
I think that in our modern
world, for some of us
it's a lot closer
than a 5-mile radius.
But yeah, everything we need to
survive is in a 5-mile radius
just about anywhere
in the world.
We know that's
true because we see
that the whole world's been
populated and inhabited
by people.
It's pretty amazing to me to
know that in this environment
where I am right now,
I, could step outside
into the woods of Maine.
And yeah, everything
I need is here.
Do I have the skill
set for everything?
Do I need to learn it?
Maybe.
If I live in a city,
that's my landscape.
That's my ecosystem,
essentially.
And everything I need-- is
it within a 5-mile radius?
It better be.
That's what cities
are set up for.
They're set up for
people on foot.
As a wild food
forager here, I know
that the things that I
need are within reach.
I don't like going to the city.
But when I do, I know that
what I need is within reach.
In fact, I have this
deep level of trust
that at all times everything
I need is basically at hand.
When we go to the city,
I like to think of myself
as supermarket
foraging sometimes,
taking what's in my landscape.
And that's what's
in my landscape.
But yeah, I really do
believe that for people
who are interested in going
outside and to real nature,
they're going to find
all the foods that they
need right there.
They're growing there.
They're just waiting for
people to interact with.
And there's a native belief
that comes out of California
that I really like.
It's the idea that
nature becomes very sick
when human beings are not
foraging and hunting in it.
I'm not talking about that
trophy buck hunting mentality.
I'm not talking about
robbing ecosystems
of the plants that are there.
But sustainable foraging,
sustainable hunting
is what keeps
ecosystems healthy.
The natives of
California believe
that when human beings
are not present,
the land returns to wildness
and a kind of wildness that
degenerates it and
that we are literally
the gardeners of the
ecosystem, that our job is
to go throughout the
world hunting and foraging
in a sustainable way to
keep the lands healthy.
If you think about it, if you
were going to suddenly move
outside, one of the
first things you'd
have to do before
you got to food
is you'd need to
gather firewood.
That means you're going to
grab up all the dead and dying
sticks.
You're going to grab
up all the dry wood.
You're going to create
airflow in that ecosystem.
Then you're going to begin
challenging the plant
colonies and the animal
colonies by selectively
taking from them.
And you're going to cause
those colonies to become
stronger and healthier.
And because we have
this unique brain,
we have the ability to oversee
that in a very intelligent way
so that interacting
with the ecosystem
is what brings health
to that ecosystem.
Now, today we have this
idea of land conservation.
And the idea is to keep
people out of nature.
We've been tricked into an
idea that human beings are
inherently bad for
the environment.
That's not true.
Our industrialized civilization
is bad for the environment.
But we're actually quite
good for the environment.
By keeping us out of wild
lands-- in other words,
conservation programs
and preservation programs
that exist today keep
people from being
able to interact
with the landscape.
And the landscape, according
to the native belief,
begins to degrade.
So creating more and more
national parks and more
and more environments where
people are not allowed
might seem to somebody
enculturated into the belief
that we're bad for the ecosystem
might seem like a good idea.
But by prohibiting foraging
and prohibiting hunting,
we actually hurt the
ecosystem, in my opinion
and in the belief of many
native peoples around the world.
We are here to interact
with it in the same way
that a beaver is here to
build dams up for watersheds.
That's their job.
And if they don't do
that, the ecosystem fails.
If we're not out there living
as hunter-gatherer-gardeners,
our ecosystem begins to degrade.
And unfortunately, the
industrialized civilization
wants to keep us out
of nature and keep
us contained inside its bubble.
This is not just hurting us.
It's hurting everything.
How can you respect a nature
you don't interact with?
How could you respect an Earth
you don't go to for your needs?
It's not really possible.
We learn to respect life
by interacting with it
and by getting
our needs from it.
And when you do that,
it's very difficult
to exploit it because
exploiting it means
your line ends eventually.
And so we think progress
could be infinite
because we don't see where
what we have is coming from.
And we don't see the
damage it's doing.
If we lived in our natural
way, we would see that.
And we would stop.
And we would live in a way that
brings us back into balance
with our beautiful planet.
No conversation
about food is going
to be complete if we don't
talk about water because water
is part of our diet.
It shares the same--
it goes in the same way.
It goes through our
digestive tract.
The interesting thing
about water-- to me,
one of the many
interesting things--
is the water you drink
goes down your esophagus
through your stomach into
your small intestine, where
it's immediately
absorbed into your blood.
In other words,
the water you drink
is your blood an hour from now.
You drink a glass of water now.
You pee an hour later.
There's not a tube that goes
from the mouth down to where
you pee from.
It goes through
your bloodstream.
And it's filtered
out by your kidneys.
Now, if you thought
about your body, which
we know is 65% to 75% water,
if we picture our bodies to be
like a fish tank and
we thought about all
that water in the fish tank,
and we pictured ourselves to be
more like the fish
swimming in the fish tank,
how could the fish be
polluted if not first
the water was actually polluted?
And how are we going to get
the pollutants out of the fish
if we don't first get
them out of the water?
So if we walked
into a setting where
we knew the fish were
unhealthy and toxic,
what would the first
thing we'd do be?
Take the fish out and
clean them and then
put them back in dirty water?
It wouldn't make any sense.
We'd have to replace
the water first.
It's so important to your
cleansing and detoxification
and your health that
you're constantly
replacing your body water with
clean, fresh, healthy water.
Otherwise the cells are
sitting in this toxic soup
all the time.
If you thought about a fish
tank and a healthier fish
tank, what's more important,
the quality of the food
you give the fish or
the quality of the water
that the fish are in?
It's really obvious to people.
It's the quality of the water.
You couldn't put dirty
water in a fish tank.
And you could then go out
and buy the best-quality fish
flakes that exist.
You could buy the
highest-quality fish food
and feed it to
them all day long.
It's not going to matter
if the water is not clean.
Your blood-- not
just your blood,
your cerebrospinal fluid.
That's the fluid your
brain floats inside of--
your intracellular fluid,
your lymph, your extracellular
fluid, all of these
fluids in your body--
they're made of the
water you drink.
And if you're not drinking
extremely clean water,
then you're going to be
taking and bioaccumulating
the toxins that
are in the water.
Those could be the plastics
that are found in bottled water.
Those could be the flourides and
the chlorine that's added to--
as well as other things
people don't realize
is in their industrial
water, in their tap water.
For instance, phosphorus acid
and lye are added to adjust pH.
So people aren't realizing
they're ingesting these things
all the time.
And they're accumulating.
And they're getting
into the fish.
They're getting into your cells.
So by switching to
a clean water source
or having a high-quality
filtered water,
some kind of clean water,
what you know you're doing
is replacing the toxic body
water with clean water.
Once that water is
clean, the cells
can start to give up their
toxins to that water.
You clean that water out again.
You keep doing that.
Eventually the whole
system runs itself clean.
Like I said, the body is always
wants to detoxify itself.
It just needs to be given the
right elements, if you will.
Water used to be
considered a great element.
Today we don't really
think of it that way.
But to some of us, water
is a very sacred thing
because it's literally
what we're made of.
The question about what's
the best water for a person
to drink is a challenging
one today because most of us
don't have access to really
what the cleanest water left is.
The whole surface
of the Earth has
been contaminated by the
pollutants we've released
all throughout our ecosystem.
And the only clean
water really left
is the water that's
underground in aquifers.
Now, that water in the aquifers
is brought to the surface
by springs.
And it's brought to
the surface by wells.
That means somebody who has an
artesian well or somebody that
has access to a
spring has access
to probably the
cleanest substance that
exists on Earth, the last clean
substance that exists on Earth.
What's so unique is that
they can make 65% to 75%
of their body out
of that substance.
That to me is miraculous.
If somebody didn't have
access to an artesian
well, if they didn't
have a friend with one
that they could go visit, or
if they didn't have access
to a spring probably
the best thing to do
would be to look at
filtering methods
or to look at bottled waters.
And both have challenges.
When we filter water,
we're filtering tap water.
And unfortunately, a lot of
the filters on the market today
do not do an exceptional job
of removing all the pollutants
that are in there.
The carbon block filters,
like the countertop or ones
attached to your faucet--
really all they do is
remove smells from water.
The reverse osmosis is
a very effective filter.
But it creates a
tremendous amount of waste,
up to 5 gallons--
sometimes even as
much as 40 gallons--
for every gallon that
you get out of it.
And it creates a water that
the World Health Organization
has told us causes
diuresis, loss of minerals,
and may be implicated in several
different degenerative disease
states.
So we know that that
filtered water is not
particularly healthy.
And it leaves us
with this option
of bottled water,
which a lot of us
don't feel has the ecological--
it's not ecologically
balanced for us.
That left me with a real
passion for spring water.
And that's why I created
findaspring.com, which is
a website you can go to online.
It's a database of springs
all over the world.
And what you can do
is just get your car,
drive over to the spring
with some bottles,
fill them up, bring them home,
and that's your drinking water.
That's the water you
make your body out
of-- out of the cleanest water
that exists in the world.
And I think it's a
really brilliant idea
for those who can do it.
And for those who
can't do it, I really
recommend you find the
highest-quality bottled water
or the best filter that you can.
And you get real
conscious about if you're
drinking filtered water.
If you want to add a
little bit of mineral
to that, you could use a
little pinch of sea salt.
Add it to the water to give
some of those minerals back so
you can overcome
some of the problems
of the filtered waters.
We're at this place in
history where people just
don't think water matters.
They've kind of desecrated
the most sacred thing
on the planet.
It's what we're made of.
It matters.
Why do you drink?
It's your body.
It's your blood.
It matters.
And so you want to
get real conscious
about choosing the
best water you can
and then realizing that not
all the water available to you
is created equal.
It's not just an inert chemical.
It's something more
special than that.
I was raised in a
culture that did not
consider food an important
part of your budget.
The idea was, how much
can we save on food?
The idea was, how
much money can we
have surplus to buy stuff with?
And if you could cut
the food costs down,
well, then you could
buy more stuff.
It's not considered
elitist to have a computer.
elitist to have cable.
It's not considered
elitist to have 14 cell
phones in a household anymore.
This is normal for people.
What is considered elitist
is to buy good food.
This is really strange
to me because this
is what we're made of.
This is what our children
are going to be made of.
Yeah, you could
spend a lot of money
going to some of the
high-end chain health
food stores if you bought
all your food there.
And it could be prohibitive
for some people.
But when you buy your food
from farmers' markets,
when you buy your
food from farmers,
when you do things
like that, you actually
save a lot more money on
food than you'd realize.
For instance, if you go
to the farmers' market,
you're buying in bulk direct.
That means you're cutting out
the middleman of the store.
The reason food is so
expensive at the health food
store is because
that food has to be
bought by that health food
store and transported there.
And they need to turn a
profit when they sell it.
You can cut that out by
going to farmers' markets.
You can cut that out by going
direct to the farm, where
farmers will sell you food
at prices you can't imagine.
Now, it requires a different
way of thinking because you
start thinking more long term.
When I was growing up,
I thought about food
for that day or that week.
I certainly didn't think
about food for the year.
The way that I save money buying
my food today is I stock up.
That means when things
are available in the fall,
I buy a lot.
I store them in my basement.
I put food away.
I ferment food.
And I plan out my food year now.
I probably spend a fraction of--
I probably spend about half
what I was spending on food when
I bought from health
food stores because I
didn't understand how to plan.
Remember that your grandmother,
your grandfather-- they
thought about food in
a more long-term way.
And they never had a household
that didn't have food.
The average person today--
they run out of food.
We got to get to
the supermarket.
We don't have any
food in the house.
That wouldn't have
happened to people
before because people planned
things out more long term.
So in my basement right now,
I have lots of vegetables.
It's the middle of winter.
And these vegetables
were grown in the autumn.
But they keep down
there in the cool.
And I've learned how to do that.
And I was able to buy them
in bulk inexpensively.
I buy my food in bulk now.
And I save a lot
of money that way.
And I think that the idea of us
spending these extremely high
premiums in the whole
foods-type environment--
I don't see that being something
we'll do much into the future.
I think of those
places as a place
to get something that I
need that I don't have
and I can't get from my
farmers' market or from a farm.
But I certainly don't get
all my food from there.
I think it is
prohibitively expensive.
And you would have to
be a bit of an elitist
to be able to afford to do that.
But I think we can all afford
to buy the foods that we need
that will support our health.
And we may need
to reanalyze what
our spending priorities are.
Why is cable television a
priority over quality food
for our children?
How did it get like that?
It's just a given you're
going to have cable.
But it's not a given
that somebody is going
to have high-quality food.
I think we can reprioritize.
We can think about
how we spend our money
and what's really
important to us.
And if our health and
the future of our progeny
is important to us, we're
going to want to invest
in some high-quality food.
[MUSIC PLAYING]